---
layout: post
title: PhD Opening in Robot Control Fall 2026
date: 2025-08-31 11:59:00-0400
description: Opening
tags: admission
categories: student_admission
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
---



The Robotic Actuators and Dynamics Lab in the School of Matter, Transport, and Energy (SEMTE) at Arizona State University is seeking multiple highly motivated individuals for a fully-funded Ph.D. in robotics, starting in Fall 2026. Ph.D. students will receive tuition coverage and a stipend. 

##### Project:
The student will work on the control and motion planning of robots for locomotion and mobile manipulation with our customized platforms (Quadruped and humanoid systems).

##### Qualifications:
1. BS or MS degree in the field of electrical engineering, computer science, and mechanical engineering, or similar.
2. Strong background in control, machine learning, dynamics modeling, autonomous systems, and embedded systems. 
3. Preferred skills: Linux, ROS, Docker, Python, C++, Issac Lab, MuJoCo, 
4. Prior experience in publications

##### How to apply:
To apply, interested candidates should submit an application to Arizona State University and specify their interest in working with Prof. Sun. Additionally, they should send an email titled "Prospective Ph.D. Student"  to jiefeng.sun@asu.edu, attaching their CV, transcript, and a cover letter before submitting their application. Dr. Sun can advise PhD students in the following program:
 - ME PhD Program: [https://semte.engineering.asu.edu/mechanical-graduate/](https://semte.engineering.asu.edu/mechanical-graduate/)
 - EE PhD Program: [https://degrees.apps.asu.edu/masters-phd/major/ASU00/ESEEPHD/electrical-engineering-phd](https://degrees.apps.asu.edu/masters-phd/major/ASU00/ESEEPHD/electrical-engineering-phd)
 - RAS PhD Program: [https://msn.engineering.asu.edu/degrees/robotics-and-autonomous-systems-mechatronics-and-automation-phd/](https://msn.engineering.asu.edu/degrees/robotics-and-autonomous-systems-mechatronics-and-automation-phd/)

Strong candidates will be contacted for interviews. 

##### PI: 
Dr. Jiefeng Sun obtained his Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Colorado State University. Before joining ASU, he was a postdoc at Yale University. His work has been selected as the finalist for the best student paper award at the 2018 IROS. He is the associate editor of 2023 ICRA, and he is the Reviewer of the Year 2021 for Smart Materials and Structures Journal, a 2022 DARPA Riser, and an ASME-DSCD rising star.
Arizona State University: Ranking: #41Mechanical Engineering, #43 Computer Science*, #34 Electrical Engineering. Living: convenient life in Phoenix metropolitan area;15 mins to phoenix airport.
